Upon receipt of an alien’s application for asylum and other documents, the Migration Department may decide:

Not to examine the asylum application. Such a decision is taken after the Migration Department has determined, on the basis of available information, that: an foreigner has been granted asylum by another Member State of the European Union or by a safe third country and may therefore return to that country and continue to use the asylum; he entered the Republic of Lithuania from a safe third country; he has filed a subsequent application for asylum which does not contain any new substantive reasons. The decision not to examine the asylum application is taken within 48 hours, which can be extended by up to 3 business days.
Not to examine the application for asylum in substance and transfer the asylum seeker to another Member State of the European Union. Such a decision must be taken when, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 states that another Member State of the European Union is responsible for the examination of the application for asylum lodged.
Examine the application for asylum in substance as a matter of urgency. Such a decision must be taken when the Migration Department, after assessing the available information, determines that the asylum seeker:
came from a safe country of origin;
in the application for asylum, he has provided only information which is not relevant to the examination of whether the foreigner can be granted asylum;
in order to mislead the investigation, provided misleading information about his/her identity or nationality or false documents, or did not provide or destroyed the information or documents concerning his/her identity or nationality which may materially affect the decision on asylum;
has submitted an application for asylum based on the data provided by the asylum seeker which are inconsistent, contradictory, misleading and inconsistent with the information on the country of origin of the foreigner and therefore manifestly unconvincing;

has submitted a subsequent application for asylum where no new essential information or data have emerged or the submission whereof significantly increases the likelihood that the asylum seeker may meet the criteria for asylum;
has applied for asylum only in order to prevent the adoption or execution of a decision to return or expel a foreigner to a foreign country;
refused to allow his fingerprints to be taken;
may, for serious reasons, be considered to be a threat to national security or public order.
The decision on the application for asylum, which is examined in substance as a matter of urgency, is taken within 7 business days, which can be extended to a maximum of 3 business days.

Examine the application for asylum in substance. Such a decision must be taken when the Migration Department, on the basis of the information available, finds that there is no reason not to examine the application, to transfer the asylum seeker to another Member State of the European Union or to examine the application as a matter of urgency. The decision on the application for asylum, which is examined in substance, is taken within 3 months, which can be extended for a maximum of 3 months.
A thorough, independent and impartial investigation must be carried out before deciding on an application for asylum. Examination of the application for asylum is a complex administrative procedure, which is described in detail in the law. The Migration Department performs an investigation to the asylum application and makes the decision on asylum. The Migration Department checks the information provided by the asylum seeker and collects additional information on the circumstances on which the application is based. When all the necessary information is collected, the Migration Department evaluates whether the asylum seeker can be granted asylum and takes one of the following decisions:

to grant a refugee status and to issue a residence permit of a long-term resident of the Republic of Lithuania in the European Union (permanent residence permit) valid for 5 years;
refuse the refugee status, grant subsidiary protection and issue a temporary residence permit in the Republic of Lithuania, valid for 2 years;
refuse the asylum and to issue a temporary residence permit on other grounds;
refuse asylum and return an foreigner or expel him/her from Lithuania.
All decisions taken by the Migration Department may be appealed to the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court within 14 days from the date of service of the decision. After examining the complaint, the court may satisfy it and oblige the Migration Department to re-examine the alien’s application. After the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court rejects the complaint, the foreigner has the right to appeal to the Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania, which may satisfy the complaint and return the case to the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court or Migration Department for re-examination or rejection of the complaint. If the complaint is rejected, the decision of the Migration Department becomes effective.

During the appeal procedure, legal services may be provided to the foreigner free of charge.
